Well, remember we
mentioned CSS as appetizer.
CSS should be small and
as soon as possible.
In fact, in our code,
let's look at our code.
Let me close these things I have here,
index.html.
I start with the script.
I will solve the script problem
in a minute, but that's wrong.
The first thing I need is a stylesheet.
So I should move both stylesheets
to the top, before anything else.
So, I wanna help discovery, and
I want the browser to discover
my CSS file as soon as possible.
Why?
Because the CSS file will block render.
I know that the browser will need
all the CSS files to render anything
on the screen.
So I don't wanna make a late discovery.
I don't want the browser to
discover this when it's late, okay?
Make sense?
Well, that's for CSS.
Also, if I analyze what's going on here,
I actually have three CSS files.
Styles CSS, one that comes from Google,
and background CSS.
And, you say, okay, why background CSS?
Look at this.
Why background CSS?
It's this one.
It's difficult to show you
this without the hovering.
This one, why is not downloading
really fast as the other two?
So if I have a style CSS here,
it's starting the download process,
it starts here.
But background CSS takes a while.
I wanna push this back.
Why?
You see the red line, the vertical line.
That vertical line doesn't
happen before that CSS file.
Because we know that
the browser will never rend,
the never rend the pixel until all the CSS
files were downloaded and parsed.
And if I can move this somehow that way,
maybe I can move that line as well.
It's not about the line, it's about
the metric that will improve user's
perception, and
that will improve conversion, okay?
Remember that.
So what's going on with
our background CSS?
Well, if we look at the code,
the code is just adding styles.css.
But when we get into styles.css,
it's importing the background CSS file.
Because some designers prefer to
do that to separate the CSS file,
like in per topic or per section, but
this is pretty bad for performance.
Why?
Because we have to wait until
the browser downloaded and parsed.
Styles CSS file to actually realize
that there is another one to download,
so we have late discovery,
the browser discover background CSS late.
Does it make sense?
So we don't want that late discovery for
our CSS.
So don't use @import.
So here we can just copy and
paste the CSS into one file or
if you want on HTTP/2 is not
going to have a lot of problems
to add background CSS here,
so we have early discovery.
Later today, we will see how to improve
that in case you cannot do this.
Say for some reason that CSS,
the name of the CSS,
we know that after some execution, well,
we will see how to solve the problem.
So now if I refresh, I should see
a difference on loading CSS files
that now background and
styles are being downloaded in parallel,
at the same time, not in sequence.
Can you see that?
So then we are letting the browser know
all the CSS as soon as possible.
Make sense?
We still have some problems
with JavaScript, okay.
But we will get there.
Because JavaScript should be the dessert,
as I mentioned before.
So we need to defer JavaScript
as soon as possible.
So because JavaScript will block parsing.
And it also uses the main thread,
the same main thread that is
used by the browser to layout,
composite, and make all the stuff.
So first, remove or defer unused code.
So I remember a research
that found that typically
20% of the JavaScript file
is not being used ever.
It's like orphan code that you have there
in your JavaScript file that is not going
to be used, but
it needs to be parsed anyway.
And JavaScript is the most expensive
asset that you have in your website.
It's not because of the file size,
because maybe JPEG files can be larger.
It's because of the CPU cost, because
we have to compile the JavaScript code.
So there is a just in time compiler,
user's devices and
parse and compile the JavaScript and
then execute that JavaScript code.
And then that's typically 1000
times more costly than a JPEG.
So that's why JavaScript can be so,
so important.
And how to do that.
So how to defer JavaScript code?
Well, we need to convert our script
tags into non-blocking script
because by default when
you have blocking scripts,
you will see things like this,
like a stair here in the diagram.
Can you see that there is like a stair.
But you don't see any
other parallel downloads.
You just see one, one, one, one,
and then parallel downloads.
When you see this in your waterfall chart,
that typically means you
have blocking scripts.
In this case, we have three scripts.
The first one is HTML, and
then script, script, script.
That's because we already mentioned this,
but
by default we have HTML
parsing here going on.
Here.
The HTML is parsing.
And it founds a script, and
it says, there is a script.
Okay, we do nothing else.
We pause parsing.
We pause everything else.
We download the script and
execute the script, and then we continue.
And that's wrong.
We don't want that.
That's why HTML5 supports
now the defer attribute.
If you use the defer attribute,
it will download the script
in parallel with the rest and
it will wait for the HTML to end
parsing to execute your JavaScript.
That's defer.
And then you have also async.
That async will download in parallel, but
it will try to execute it immediately,
as soon as possible,
pausing the parsing for a while.
If you don't know which one to use,
you should use defer by default and
let async only for one.
It's a very specific case such as
analytics and it should be really,
really short because you're still
harming performance of your parsing.
So in our example,
we can go to the script,
we don't need to move the script
to the bottom of the body.
That was an old trick, no need to do that.
You just need to add the defer attribute.
It's a Boolean attribute.
And that's all.
So now that JavaScript code is
not going to block the parsing.
Have in mind,
your JavaScript code won't be
executed until the body ends parsing.
Okay, so it will take more
time to execute that code.
By the way we are still on basics.
These are basics of
optimizing performance.
Compress and Obfuscate JavaScript and CSS.
This is still valid on HTTP2.
Compress is going through
a compression tool and
obfuscating the JavaScript and CSS.
So it has been proven that if you do that,
you may still improve the file size and
transfer by around 10%.
It's not mandatory.
I mean, it's not one of the things that
will change your life in performance,
but every small thing counts.
I remember a joke from a web
performance engineer saying
that we as web performance
engineers we are counting
milliseconds as top models or
counting grams, right?
Like saying that we are counting
milliseconds and for
us milliseconds are really
really important, okay?
Release the main thread
as soon as possible.
What's the main thread?
The only thread where you're
executing code by default.
So you shouldn't start executing code,
actually,
you shouldn't take more than
15 milliseconds of the thread.
Actually, that's known as a long task.
If you have something, some JavaScript
code that is taking more than 15
milliseconds and
of course that depends on the CPU.
But if it's taking more
than 15 milliseconds,
it's converting into a long task.
And that long task is probably pushing
the rendering of the next frames.
So you have kind of clunky user
interface if that happens.
Embrace responsive images.
Responsive images means that
you are providing to the user
the image that it needs.
Not just a large image that
then with CSS resize, or
things like that, and
we will get into that later.
Embrace SVG, for icons, for logos,
every time it's a vector-based image.
It will be much better to send SVG.
On 98% of the situation there are some
cases, and remember, don't trust me.
Try it.
Test that.
Make two versions.
Compare the versions.
See the waterfall charts.
See how the the web vitals are doing
on each case and then make a decision.
Compress images define placeholder size.
Placeholder size is use CSS or
HTML to define the width and
the height of the image placeholder.
If you don't do that,
and I think that's one of
the problems we have in our website.
we will have content layer shift.
Because the browser will not know
the size of the image before actually
downloading the image.
So it needs to download the image,
decode the image to actually know,
that image is 100 by 50.
And then it needs to lay out
the rest of the elements around.
Okay, make sense?
And compress images is using tools
that will compress your JPEG files,
your PNG files to remove unnecessary data.
Careful with web fonts.
We are using web fonts.
What's the problem with web fonts?
Web fonts are really nice.
They can be really nice in your screen,
but
actually text by default is non blocking.
When you have text in your HTML, your text
will appear unless you use web fonts.
When you use web fonts, and
it depends how you're using web fonts.
By default you are converting something
that is nonblocking into something that
is blocking because now you won't see text
until the font is downloaded and parsed.
There are ways to solve that problem or
to deal with that, okay?
But for now let's say be careful.
So those were just basic
ideas on web optimization.
Do you have any questions on any of those?